src/dma.md, before:

# Direct Memory Access (DMA)

This section covers the core requirements for building a memory safe API around
DMA transfers.

The DMA peripheral is used to perform memory transfers in parallel to the work
of the processor (the execution of the main program). A DMA transfer is more or
less equivalent to spawning a thread (see [`thread::spawn`]) to do a `memcpy`.
We'll use the fork-join model to illustrate the requirements of a memory safe
API.

[`thread::spawn`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/thread/fn.spawn.html

Consider the following DMA primitives:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:6:57}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:59:60}}
```

Assume that the `Dma1Channel1` is statically configured to work with serial port
(AKA UART or USART) #1, `Serial1`, in one-shot mode (i.e. not circular mode).
`Serial1` provides the following *blocking* API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:62:72}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:74:80}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:82:83}}
```

Let's say we want to extend `Serial1` API to (a) asynchronously send out a
buffer and (b) asynchronously fill a buffer.

We'll start with a memory unsafe API and we'll iterate on it until it's
completely memory safe. On each step we'll show you how the API can be broken to
make you aware of the issues that need to be addressed when dealing with
asynchronous memory operations.

## A first stab

For starters, let's try to use the [`Write::write_all`] API as a reference. To
keep things simple let's ignore all error handling.

[`Write::write_all`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/trait.Write.html#method.write_all

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:7:47}}
```

> **NOTE:** `Transfer` could expose a futures or generator based API instead of
> the API shown above. That's an API design question that has little bearing on
> the memory safety of the overall API so we won't delve into it in this text.

We can also implement an asynchronous version of [`Read::read_exact`].

[`Read::read_exact`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/trait.Read.html#method.read_exact

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:49:63}}
```

Here's how to use the `write_all` API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:66:71}}
```

And here's an example of using the `read_exact` API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:74:86}}
```

## `mem::forget`

[`mem::forget`] is a safe API. If our API is truly safe then we should be able
to use both together without running into undefined behavior. However, that's
not the case; consider the following example:

[`mem::forget`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/fn.forget.html

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:91:103}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:105:112}}
```

Here we start a DMA transfer, in `start`, to fill an array allocated on the
stack and then `mem::forget` the returned `Transfer` value. Then we proceed to
return from `start` and execute the function `bar`.

This series of operations results in undefined behavior. The DMA transfer writes
to stack memory but that memory is released when `start` returns and then reused
by `bar` to allocate variables like `x` and `y`. At runtime this could result in
variables `x` and `y` changing their value at random times. The DMA transfer
could also overwrite the state (e.g. link register) pushed onto the stack by the
prologue of function `bar`.

Note that if we had not use `mem::forget`, but `mem::drop`, it would have been
possible to make `Transfer`'s destructor stop the DMA transfer and then the
program would have been safe. But one can *not* rely on destructors running to
enforce memory safety because `mem::forget` and memory leaks (see RC cycles) are
safe in Rust.

We can fix this particular problem by changing the lifetime of the buffer from
`'a` to `'static` in both APIs.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:7:12}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:21:27}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:35:36}}
```

If we try to replicate the previous problem we note that `mem::forget` no longer
causes problems.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:40:52}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:54:61}}
```

As before, the DMA transfer continues after `mem::forget`-ing the `Transfer`
value. This time that's not an issue because `buf` is statically allocated
(e.g. `static mut` variable) and not on the stack.

## Overlapping use

Our API doesn't prevent the user from using the `Serial` interface while the DMA
transfer is in progress. This could lead the transfer to fail or data to be
lost.

There are several ways to prevent overlapping use. One way is to have `Transfer`
take ownership of `Serial1` and return it back when `wait` is called.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:7:32}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:40:53}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:60:68}}
```
The move semantics statically prevent access to `Serial1` while the transfer is
in progress.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:71:81}}
```

There are other ways to prevent overlapping use. For example, a (`Cell`) flag
that indicates whether a DMA transfer is in progress could be added to
`Serial1`. When the flag is set `read`, `write`, `read_exact` and `write_all`
would all return an error (e.g. `Error::InUse`) at runtime. The flag would be
set when `write_all` / `read_exact` is used and cleared in `Transfer.wait`.

## Compiler (mis)optimizations

The compiler is free to re-order and merge non-volatile memory operations to
better optimize a program. With our current API, this freedom can lead to
undefined behavior. Consider the following example:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:84:97}}
```

Here the compiler is free to move `buf.reverse()` before `t.wait()`, which would
result in a data race: both the processor and the DMA would end up modifying
`buf` at the same time. Similarly the compiler can move the zeroing operation to
after `read_exact`, which would also result in a data race.

To prevent these problematic reorderings we can use a [`compiler_fence`]

[`compiler_fence`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/sync/atomic/fn.compiler_fence.html

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/four.rs:9:65}}
```

We use `Ordering::Release` in `read_exact` and `write_all` to prevent all
preceding memory operations from being moved *after* `self.dma.start()`, which
performs a volatile write.

Likewise, we use `Ordering::Acquire` in `Transfer.wait` to prevent all
subsequent memory operations from being moved *before* `self.is_done()`, which
performs a volatile read.

To better visualize the effect of the fences here's a slightly tweaked version
of the example from the previous section. We have added the fences and their
orderings in the comments.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/four.rs:68:87}}
```

The zeroing operation can *not* be moved *after* `read_exact` due to the
`Release` fence. Similarly, the `reverse` operation can *not* be moved *before*
`wait` due to the `Acquire` fence. The memory operations *between* both fences
*can* be freely reordered across the fences but none of those operations
involves `buf` so such reorderings do *not* result in undefined behavior.

Note that `compiler_fence` is a bit stronger than what's required. For example,
the fences will prevent the operations on `x` from being merged even though we
know that `buf` doesn't overlap with `x` (due to Rust aliasing rules). However,
there exist no intrinsic that's more fine grained than `compiler_fence`.

### Don't we need a memory barrier?

That depends on the target architecture. In the case of Cortex M0 to M4F cores,
[AN321] says:

[AN321]: https://static.docs.arm.com/dai0321/a/DAI0321A_programming_guide_memory_barriers_for_m_profile.pdf

> 3.2 Typical usages
>
> (..)
>
> The use of DMB is rarely needed in Cortex-M processors because they do not
> reorder memory transactions. However, it is needed if the software is to be
> reused on other ARM processors, especially multi-master systems. For example:
>
> - DMA controller configuration. A barrier is required between a CPU memory
>   access and a DMA operation.
>
> (..)
>
> 4.18 Multi-master systems
>
> (..)
>
> Omitting the DMB or DSB instruction in the examples in Figure 41 on page 47
> and Figure 42 would not cause any error because the Cortex-M processors:
>
> - do not re-order memory transfers
> - do not permit two write transfers to be overlapped.

Where Figure 41 shows a DMB (memory barrier) instruction being used before
starting a DMA transaction.

In the case of Cortex-M7 cores you'll need memory barriers (DMB/DSB) if you are
using the data cache (DCache), unless you manually invalidate the buffer used by
the DMA. Even with the data cache disabled, memory barriers might still be
required to avoid reordering in the store buffer.

If your target is a multi-core system then it's very likely that you'll need
memory barriers.

If you do need the memory barrier then you need to use [`atomic::fence`] instead
of `compiler_fence`. That should generate a DMB instruction on Cortex-M devices.

[`atomic::fence`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/sync/atomic/fn.fence.html

## Generic buffer

Our API is more restrictive that it needs to be. For example, the following
program won't be accepted even though it's valid.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:67:85}}
```

To accept such program we can make the buffer argument generic.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:9:65}}
```

> **NOTE:** `AsRef<[u8]>` (`AsMut<[u8]>`) could have been used instead of
> `AsSlice<Element = u8>` (`AsMutSlice<Element = u8`).

Now the `reuse` program will be accepted.

## Immovable buffers

With this modification the API will also accept arrays by value (e.g. `[u8;
16]`). However, using arrays can result in pointer invalidation. Consider the
following program.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:88:103}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:105:112}}
```

The `read_exact` operation will use the address of the `buffer` local to the
`start` function. That local `buffer` will be freed when `start` returns and the
pointer used in `read_exact` will become invalidated. You'll end up with a
situation similar to the [`unsound`](#dealing-with-memforget) example.

To avoid this problem we require that the buffer used with our API retains its
memory location even when it's moved. The [`Pin`] newtype provides such
guarantee. We can update our API to required that all buffers are "pinned"
first.

[`Pin`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html

> **NOTE:** To compile all the programs below this point you'll need Rust
> `>=1.33.0`. As of time of writing (2019-01-04) that means using the nightly
> channel.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:16:33}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:48:59}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:74:75}}
```

> **NOTE:** We could have used the [`StableDeref`] trait instead of the `Pin`
> newtype but opted for `Pin` since it's provided in the standard library.

[`StableDeref`]: https://crates.io/crates/stable_deref_trait

With this new API we can use `&'static mut` references, `Box`-ed slices, `Rc`-ed
slices, etc.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:78:89}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:91:101}}
```

## `'static` bound

Does pinning let us safely use stack allocated arrays? The answer is *no*.
Consider the following example.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:104:123}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:125:132}}
```

As seen many times before, the above program runs into undefined behavior due to
stack frame corruption.

The API is unsound for buffers of type `Pin<&'a mut [u8]>` where `'a` is *not*
`'static`. To prevent the problem we have to add a `'static` bound in some
places.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:15:25}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:40:51}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:66:67}}
```

Now the problematic program will be rejected.

## Destructors

Now that the API accepts `Box`-es and other types that have destructors we need
to decide what to do when `Transfer` is early-dropped.

Normally, `Transfer` values are consumed using the `wait` method but it's also
possible to, implicitly or explicitly, `drop` the value before the transfer is
over. For example, dropping a `Transfer<Box<[u8]>>` value will cause the buffer
to be deallocated. This can result in undefined behavior if the transfer is
still in progress as the DMA would end up writing to deallocated memory.

In such scenario one option is to make `Transfer.drop` stop the DMA transfer.
The other option is to make `Transfer.drop` wait for the transfer to finish.
We'll pick the former option as it's cheaper.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:18:72}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:82:99}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:109:117}}
```

Now the DMA transfer will be stopped before the buffer is deallocated.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:120:134}}
```

## Summary

To sum it up, we need to consider all the following points to achieve  memory
safe DMA transfers:

- Use immovable buffers plus indirection: `Pin<B>`. Alternatively, you can use
  the `StableDeref` trait.

- The ownership of the buffer must be passed to the DMA : `B: 'static`.

- Do *not* rely on destructors running for memory safety. Consider what happens
  if `mem::forget` is used with your API.

- *Do* add a custom destructor that stops the DMA transfer, or waits for it to
  finish. Consider what happens if `mem::drop` is used with your API.

---

This text leaves out up several details required to build a production grade
DMA abstraction, like configuring the DMA channels (e.g. streams, circular vs
one-shot mode, etc.), alignment of buffers, error handling, how to make the
abstraction device-agnostic, etc. All those aspects are left as an exercise for
the reader / community (`:P`).

Commit message:

Explain how fences interact with volatile operations
This was the result of a discussion with Amanieu at RustWeek.
It would be nice to add more details about the planned updates
(some ticket for example), and I'm not sure if this is the best
place to add it to the embedonomicon. But for now, I think
mentioning it here is better than nothing.

src/dma.md, after:

# Direct Memory Access (DMA)

This section covers the core requirements for building a memory safe API around
DMA transfers.

The DMA peripheral is used to perform memory transfers in parallel to the work
of the processor (the execution of the main program). A DMA transfer is more or
less equivalent to spawning a thread (see [`thread::spawn`]) to do a `memcpy`.
We'll use the fork-join model to illustrate the requirements of a memory safe
API.

[`thread::spawn`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/thread/fn.spawn.html

Consider the following DMA primitives:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:6:57}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:59:60}}
```

Assume that the `Dma1Channel1` is statically configured to work with serial port
(AKA UART or USART) #1, `Serial1`, in one-shot mode (i.e. not circular mode).
`Serial1` provides the following *blocking* API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:62:72}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:74:80}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/src/lib.rs:82:83}}
```

Let's say we want to extend `Serial1` API to (a) asynchronously send out a
buffer and (b) asynchronously fill a buffer.

We'll start with a memory unsafe API and we'll iterate on it until it's
completely memory safe. On each step we'll show you how the API can be broken to
make you aware of the issues that need to be addressed when dealing with
asynchronous memory operations.

## A first stab

For starters, let's try to use the [`Write::write_all`] API as a reference. To
keep things simple let's ignore all error handling.

[`Write::write_all`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/trait.Write.html#method.write_all

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:7:47}}
```

> **NOTE:** `Transfer` could expose a futures or generator based API instead of
> the API shown above. That's an API design question that has little bearing on
> the memory safety of the overall API so we won't delve into it in this text.

We can also implement an asynchronous version of [`Read::read_exact`].

[`Read::read_exact`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/trait.Read.html#method.read_exact

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:49:63}}
```

Here's how to use the `write_all` API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:66:71}}
```

And here's an example of using the `read_exact` API:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:74:86}}
```

## `mem::forget`

[`mem::forget`] is a safe API. If our API is truly safe then we should be able
to use both together without running into undefined behavior. However, that's
not the case; consider the following example:

[`mem::forget`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/fn.forget.html

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:91:103}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/one.rs:105:112}}
```

Here we start a DMA transfer, in `start`, to fill an array allocated on the
stack and then `mem::forget` the returned `Transfer` value. Then we proceed to
return from `start` and execute the function `bar`.

This series of operations results in undefined behavior. The DMA transfer writes
to stack memory but that memory is released when `start` returns and then reused
by `bar` to allocate variables like `x` and `y`. At runtime this could result in
variables `x` and `y` changing their value at random times. The DMA transfer
could also overwrite the state (e.g. link register) pushed onto the stack by the
prologue of function `bar`.

Note that if we had not use `mem::forget`, but `mem::drop`, it would have been
possible to make `Transfer`'s destructor stop the DMA transfer and then the
program would have been safe. But one can *not* rely on destructors running to
enforce memory safety because `mem::forget` and memory leaks (see RC cycles) are
safe in Rust.

We can fix this particular problem by changing the lifetime of the buffer from
`'a` to `'static` in both APIs.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:7:12}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:21:27}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:35:36}}
```

If we try to replicate the previous problem we note that `mem::forget` no longer
causes problems.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:40:52}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/two.rs:54:61}}
```

As before, the DMA transfer continues after `mem::forget`-ing the `Transfer`
value. This time that's not an issue because `buf` is statically allocated
(e.g. `static mut` variable) and not on the stack.

## Overlapping use

Our API doesn't prevent the user from using the `Serial` interface while the DMA
transfer is in progress. This could lead the transfer to fail or data to be
lost.

There are several ways to prevent overlapping use. One way is to have `Transfer`
take ownership of `Serial1` and return it back when `wait` is called.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:7:32}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:40:53}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:60:68}}
```
The move semantics statically prevent access to `Serial1` while the transfer is
in progress.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:71:81}}
```

There are other ways to prevent overlapping use. For example, a (`Cell`) flag
that indicates whether a DMA transfer is in progress could be added to
`Serial1`. When the flag is set `read`, `write`, `read_exact` and `write_all`
would all return an error (e.g. `Error::InUse`) at runtime. The flag would be
set when `write_all` / `read_exact` is used and cleared in `Transfer.wait`.

## Compiler (mis)optimizations

The compiler is free to re-order and merge non-volatile memory operations to
better optimize a program. With our current API, this freedom can lead to
undefined behavior. Consider the following example:

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/three.rs:84:97}}
```

Here the compiler is free to move `buf.reverse()` before `t.wait()`, which would
result in a data race: both the processor and the DMA would end up modifying
`buf` at the same time. Similarly the compiler can move the zeroing operation to
after `read_exact`, which would also result in a data race.

To prevent these problematic reorderings we can use a [`compiler_fence`]

[`compiler_fence`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/sync/atomic/fn.compiler_fence.html

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/four.rs:9:65}}
```

We use `Ordering::Release` in `read_exact` and `write_all` to prevent all
preceding memory operations from being moved *after* `self.dma.start()`, which
performs a volatile write.

Likewise, we use `Ordering::Acquire` in `Transfer.wait` to prevent all
subsequent memory operations from being moved *before* `self.is_done()`, which
performs a volatile read.

To better visualize the effect of the fences here's a slightly tweaked version
of the example from the previous section. We have added the fences and their
orderings in the comments.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/four.rs:68:87}}
```

The zeroing operation can *not* be moved *after* `read_exact` due to the
`Release` fence. Similarly, the `reverse` operation can *not* be moved *before*
`wait` due to the `Acquire` fence. The memory operations *between* both fences
*can* be freely reordered across the fences but none of those operations
involves `buf` so such reorderings do *not* result in undefined behavior.

Note that `compiler_fence` is a bit stronger than what's required. For example,
the fences will prevent the operations on `x` from being merged even though we
know that `buf` doesn't overlap with `x` (due to Rust aliasing rules). However,
there exist no intrinsic that's more fine grained than `compiler_fence`.

### Don't we need a memory barrier?

That depends on the target architecture. In the case of Cortex M0 to M4F cores,
[AN321] says:

[AN321]: https://static.docs.arm.com/dai0321/a/DAI0321A_programming_guide_memory_barriers_for_m_profile.pdf

> 3.2 Typical usages
>
> (..)
>
> The use of DMB is rarely needed in Cortex-M processors because they do not
> reorder memory transactions. However, it is needed if the software is to be
> reused on other ARM processors, especially multi-master systems. For example:
>
> - DMA controller configuration. A barrier is required between a CPU memory
>   access and a DMA operation.
>
> (..)
>
> 4.18 Multi-master systems
>
> (..)
>
> Omitting the DMB or DSB instruction in the examples in Figure 41 on page 47
> and Figure 42 would not cause any error because the Cortex-M processors:
>
> - do not re-order memory transfers
> - do not permit two write transfers to be overlapped.

Where Figure 41 shows a DMB (memory barrier) instruction being used before
starting a DMA transaction.

In the case of Cortex-M7 cores you'll need memory barriers (DMB/DSB) if you are
using the data cache (DCache), unless you manually invalidate the buffer used by
the DMA. Even with the data cache disabled, memory barriers might still be
required to avoid reordering in the store buffer.

If your target is a multi-core system then it's very likely that you'll need
memory barriers.

If you do need the memory barrier then you need to use [`atomic::fence`] instead
of `compiler_fence`. That should generate a DMB instruction on Cortex-M devices.

[`atomic::fence`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/sync/atomic/fn.fence.html

## Don't we need atomics?

The documentation on fences states that they only work in combination with atomics:

> A fence ‘A’ which has (at least) Release ordering semantics, synchronizes with
> a fence ‘B’ with (at least) Acquire semantics, if and only if there exist
> operations X and Y, both operating on some atomic object ‘m’ such that A is
> sequenced before X, Y is sequenced before B and Y observes the change to m.

The same is true for `compiler_fence`:

> Note that just like fence, synchronization still requires atomic operations
> to be used in both threads – it is not possible to perform synchronization
> entirely with fences and non-atomic operations.

So how does this work when not talking to another thread, but to
some hardware like the DMA engine? The answer is that in the current
implementation, volatiles happen to work just like relaxed atomic
operations. There's work going on to actually guarantee this behavior
for future versions of rust.

## Generic buffer

Our API is more restrictive that it needs to be. For example, the following
program won't be accepted even though it's valid.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:67:85}}
```

To accept such program we can make the buffer argument generic.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:9:65}}
```

> **NOTE:** `AsRef<[u8]>` (`AsMut<[u8]>`) could have been used instead of
> `AsSlice<Element = u8>` (`AsMutSlice<Element = u8`).

Now the `reuse` program will be accepted.

## Immovable buffers

With this modification the API will also accept arrays by value (e.g. `[u8;
16]`). However, using arrays can result in pointer invalidation. Consider the
following program.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:88:103}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/five.rs:105:112}}
```

The `read_exact` operation will use the address of the `buffer` local to the
`start` function. That local `buffer` will be freed when `start` returns and the
pointer used in `read_exact` will become invalidated. You'll end up with a
situation similar to the [`unsound`](#dealing-with-memforget) example.

To avoid this problem we require that the buffer used with our API retains its
memory location even when it's moved. The [`Pin`] newtype provides such
guarantee. We can update our API to required that all buffers are "pinned"
first.

[`Pin`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html

> **NOTE:** To compile all the programs below this point you'll need Rust
> `>=1.33.0`. As of time of writing (2019-01-04) that means using the nightly
> channel.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:16:33}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:48:59}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:74:75}}
```

> **NOTE:** We could have used the [`StableDeref`] trait instead of the `Pin`
> newtype but opted for `Pin` since it's provided in the standard library.

[`StableDeref`]: https://crates.io/crates/stable_deref_trait

With this new API we can use `&'static mut` references, `Box`-ed slices, `Rc`-ed
slices, etc.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:78:89}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:91:101}}
```

## `'static` bound

Does pinning let us safely use stack allocated arrays? The answer is *no*.
Consider the following example.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:104:123}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/six.rs:125:132}}
```

As seen many times before, the above program runs into undefined behavior due to
stack frame corruption.

The API is unsound for buffers of type `Pin<&'a mut [u8]>` where `'a` is *not*
`'static`. To prevent the problem we have to add a `'static` bound in some
places.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:15:25}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:40:51}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/seven.rs:66:67}}
```

Now the problematic program will be rejected.

## Destructors

Now that the API accepts `Box`-es and other types that have destructors we need
to decide what to do when `Transfer` is early-dropped.

Normally, `Transfer` values are consumed using the `wait` method but it's also
possible to, implicitly or explicitly, `drop` the value before the transfer is
over. For example, dropping a `Transfer<Box<[u8]>>` value will cause the buffer
to be deallocated. This can result in undefined behavior if the transfer is
still in progress as the DMA would end up writing to deallocated memory.

In such scenario one option is to make `Transfer.drop` stop the DMA transfer.
The other option is to make `Transfer.drop` wait for the transfer to finish.
We'll pick the former option as it's cheaper.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:18:72}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:82:99}}
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:109:117}}
```

Now the DMA transfer will be stopped before the buffer is deallocated.

``` rust
{{#include ../ci/dma/examples/eight.rs:120:134}}
```

## Summary

To sum it up, we need to consider all the following points to achieve  memory
safe DMA transfers:

- Use immovable buffers plus indirection: `Pin<B>`. Alternatively, you can use
  the `StableDeref` trait.

- The ownership of the buffer must be passed to the DMA : `B: 'static`.

- Do *not* rely on destructors running for memory safety. Consider what happens
  if `mem::forget` is used with your API.

- *Do* add a custom destructor that stops the DMA transfer, or waits for it to
  finish. Consider what happens if `mem::drop` is used with your API.

---

This text leaves out up several details required to build a production grade
DMA abstraction, like configuring the DMA channels (e.g. streams, circular vs
one-shot mode, etc.), alignment of buffers, error handling, how to make the
abstraction device-agnostic, etc. All those aspects are left as an exercise for
the reader / community (`:P`).
